process/to-do.md, before:

- ~~Make the board work~~
- ~~Make the AI work~~
- ~~Add HP to pieces~~
- ~~Account for castling and en passant~~
- ~~Think about promotion and HP~~
- ~~Make attacking remove random health~~
- ~~Handle en passant properly~~
- ~~Add PGN/Rogue message~~
- ~~Style it~~
- ~~Add working status bar~~
- ~~__NOT ANYMORE__ Add level-up when you capture a piece (you take its maximum HP? Its current HP?)~~

- ~~Think about the AI's lack of awareness of HP in its tactics~~

## Later on after I've written insane amounts of code trying to do the HP stuff

- ~~Seems to be moments where the game freezes up just after an attack - the indicator kind of just sits there and the game hangs until the next move is very suddenly made. Happens after piece animates back. Only seems to affect white attacks? Gets cumulatively worse? (On miss and HP lost)~~
- ~~Need to improve the timing and sounds and so on~~
- ~~Add impossible moves~~
- ~~Ignore check, checkmate, stalemate, 50-move rule, etc.~~
- ~~Actually add HP into the board evaluation~~
- ~~Fix bizarre issue of square getting renamed after attack (it was some weird shit with the damage message)~~
- ~~__NAH?__ Turn indicator for 2P??~~
- ~~Add 2P version (clickable black pieces, menu selection - maybe title at top then slides down on selection to reveal the board? Too smooth? Will I be able to even do it?)~~
- ~~Add check for captured king (that's a game ender! Include # notation.)~~
- ~~Oh! We need the tombstone! And the congratulations screen...?~~

- Black makes some weird moves around not attacking/capturing the king? It's always right, right? Especially a knight which can attack without reprisal...? Maybe need to slant the AI to privilege capturing the king... fuckin' siiiiighhhh

Commit message:

Status bar updates on move now

process/to-do.md, after:

- ~~Make the board work~~
- ~~Make the AI work~~
- ~~Add HP to pieces~~
- ~~Account for castling and en passant~~
- ~~Think about promotion and HP~~
- ~~Make attacking remove random health~~
- ~~Handle en passant properly~~
- ~~Add PGN/Rogue message~~
- ~~Style it~~
- ~~Add working status bar~~
- ~~__NOT ANYMORE__ Add level-up when you capture a piece (you take its maximum HP? Its current HP?)~~

- ~~Think about the AI's lack of awareness of HP in its tactics~~

## Later on after I've written insane amounts of code trying to do the HP stuff

- ~~Seems to be moments where the game freezes up just after an attack - the indicator kind of just sits there and the game hangs until the next move is very suddenly made. Happens after piece animates back. Only seems to affect white attacks? Gets cumulatively worse? (On miss and HP lost)~~
- ~~Need to improve the timing and sounds and so on~~
- ~~Add impossible moves~~
- ~~Ignore check, checkmate, stalemate, 50-move rule, etc.~~
- ~~Actually add HP into the board evaluation~~
- ~~Fix bizarre issue of square getting renamed after attack (it was some weird shit with the damage message)~~
- ~~__NAH?__ Turn indicator for 2P??~~
- ~~Add 2P version (clickable black pieces, menu selection - maybe title at top then slides down on selection to reveal the board? Too smooth? Will I be able to even do it?)~~
- ~~Add check for captured king (that's a game ender! Include # notation.)~~
- ~~Oh! We need the tombstone! And the congratulations screen...?~~
- ~~Update the status line more immediately on events~~

- Black makes some weird moves around not attacking/capturing the king? It's always right, right? Especially a knight which can attack without reprisal...? Maybe need to slant the AI to privilege capturing the king... fuckin' siiiiighhhh
